September 2025Life Sciences Practice
Reimagining life 
science enterprises  
with agentic AI
Agentic AI is poised to boost the benefits from AI by changing its role 
from tool to coworker and catalyzing an end-to-end reimagining of the 
life sciences value chain.
This article is a collaborative effort by Dan Tinkoff, Delphine Zurkiya, Eoin Leydon, and Jeffrey Lewis, 
with Chaitanya Adabala Viswa, Lionel Jin, and Meredith Langstaff, representing views from McKinsey’s 
Life Sciences Practice and QuantumBlack, AI by McKinsey.
Life sciences companies  are facing margin 
pressures, higher R&D costs, and the need 
for continuous innovation amid increasing 
technological and operational complexity. 
They’re also struggling to attract and retain 
talent. Externally, they are subject to heavy 
regulatory oversight and legislative uncertainty. 
For pharmaceutical companies, many blockbuster 
drugs are nearing patent expiration. For medtech 
companies, many devices in development, such 
as robotics and connected devices, are becoming 
complex platforms. For life science services 
companies, AI and the shift to cell and gene 
therapies are driving rapid technological changes. 
Factors such as global economic shifts, trade tariffs, 
most-favored-nation pricing policies, supply chain 
vulnerabilities, and geopolitical tensions further 
complicate the landscape. Meanwhile, the rapid 
progress of AI creates both opportunities and 
challenges. These combined pressures make it 
essential for life sciences companies to find new 
ways to boost growth, improve productivity, and 
increase operational agility.
Recent McKinsey research has found that nearly eight 
in ten companies use gen AI, yet 80 percent of them 
report no tangible bottom-line benefits.1 Function-
specific AI use cases have the greatest potential 
benefits, but companies face hurdles in expanding 
them past the pilot stage.2 Think of it as the AI 
paradox—the technology has potential, but enterprises 
haven’t yet adopted it nor seen its benefits at scale.
AI agents (for a definition, see sidebar “What is 
agentic AI?”) have the potential to resolve this 
paradox by changing AI’s role from tool to coworker. 
They can be combined into configurable networks 
that help employees by collaborating with them, 
performing tasks on their behalf, and handling 
activities that are currently low priority because of 
limited capacity, such as those related to the large 
volumes of lower-priority customers, contracts, and 
invoices. In our experience, there are benefits to 
viewing AI as a coworker: People tend to be more 
patient with AI and invest their time to improve it 
through feedback; they become creative in finding more parts of their workflow that can be “agentified” 
once they see what is possible; and they proactively 
seek better ways to reorganize workflows once they 
understand how AI can help. 
To understand how agents might change work 
and responsibilities in life sciences, we conducted 
a thorough, end-to-end, task-based analysis to 
evaluate the potential benefits of AI agents in specific 
workflows (see sidebar “How we determined the 
potential benefits of agentic AI in life sciences”). 
We analyzed 270 workflows and 1,200 tasks in 180 
job families and found that agentic AI will transform 
workflows, change how work is done, and increase 
value by spurring growth and reducing costs in 
both pharma and medtech (Exhibit 1, parts 1 and 2). 
In pharma, 75 to 85 percent of workflows contain 
tasks that could be enhanced or automated by 
agents, potentially freeing up 25 to 40 percent of 
an organization’s capacity. In medtech, the figure is 
70 to 80 percent. These capacities are at the task 
level, so they may be fractions of employees’ time. 
Organizations will need to make choices about how to 
redeploy this capacity, with implications for the shape 
of the organization and how work is conducted. 
Patients stand to benefit in various ways, including 
through quicker access to a wider range of new 
medicines, more personalized treatments developed 
using patient data, and improved matching of existing 
treatments to unmet needs.
We estimate that the full potential of agents could 
give companies incremental growth of five to 13 
percentage points in pharma and three to seven 
percentage points in medtech. EBITDA would 
increase by 3.4 to 5.4 percentage points in pharma 
and 2.2 to 4.7 percentage points in medtech over 
the next three to five years, in addition to current 
initiatives focused on growth and margin expansion.
We found that the opportunities for agentic AI 
in the pharmaceutical and medtech sectors are 
similar in most domains, except in R&D, where their 
approaches differ significantly. This article presents 
the results for both sectors and highlights notable 
differences where relevant. 
1 “Seizing the agentic AI advantage,” QuantumBlack, AI by McKinsey, June 13, 2025.
2 “Seizing the agentic AI advantage,” QuantumBlack, AI by McKinsey, June 13, 2025.
2
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
Exhibit 1, part 1
Web <2025>
<MCK254200 Agentic AI>
Exhibit <1A> of <9>
There are several potential bene/f_its of AI agents in pharma.
Growth impact
Expanded and better 
assets, more eligible 
patients reached, and 
revenue pulled forward 
within 3-to-5 year time 
frame, with potential for 
incremental 1% to 3% 
CAGR above baseline 
growthRoles with AI sidekicks
With agents as integrated 
teammates, employees’ 
impact for patients can be 
ampli/f_iedWork will transform
Note: Numbers do not include physical AI or growth from AI in products.
1Percentage points
McKinsey & Company75/endash.case85%Agenti/f_iable work/f_lows
Processes in life sciences 
where key activities can be 
augmented or automated 
by agents35%Lower-complexity agents
Agents that require 
minimal coding, with 
mostly business-driven 
build and oversight and 
rewiring mechanism for 
adoption40%‘Superpowered’ work
Work/f_lows can be 
extended by agents doing 
work that is currently too 
complex or costly for 
humans
Roles will change
95% 25/endash.case40%Freed-up enterprise 
capacity
Assigning agents to tasks 
where they excel (and 
humans don’t) can free up 
time for where humans’ 
unique abilities are needed 
most10+New role types needed
Agentic workforce can 
succeed with help from 
humans in new roles such 
as agent orchestrator and  
AI governance or quality 
manager
Revenue will be aﬀected
5/endash.case13% 6/endash.case8%Cost eﬃciency
Potential savings from 
increased productivity, 
reduced vendor spend, 
and optimized operations3.4–
5.4 p.p.1Impact to EBITDA
Full potential enterprise- 
wide impact on EBITDA 
within a time horizon of 
3 to 5 years AI agents are goal-driven systems that operate 
independently by breaking down complex 
tasks, interacting with other systems, and 
learning in real time. They use machine learning 
and rules-based AI to enable reasoning, mem -
ory, and the capacity to interact with humans. 
Gen AI includes lower-complexity agents, 
sometimes referred to as “low-code” or 
“no-code,” that employees with mini -
mal coding experience can create and 
modify using natural language on various 
platforms. It also includes higher-com-
plexity agents, sometimes referred to as 
“pro-code,” which must be developed and 
fine-tuned by data scientists or engineers. Lower-complexity agents are well-suited 
for predictable tasks that can be chunked 
into subtasks, as well as for work with 
clean data, integrated systems, limited 
specialized knowledge, and lower-risk 
tasks. Typical uses include automated 
report generation and analyzing customer 
feedback. Higher-complexity agents are 
needed when those conditions aren’t met, 
such as in predictive modeling for clinical 
trials or firmware development for medical 
devices. However, even no- and low-code 
agents require people to create, test, and 
tweak them and think through adoption 
and performance tracking. All AI agents What is agentic AI?
should be part of broader business and 
talent changes that include training and 
incentives to promote adoption. As man -
agers transition to overseeing a flexible 
network of agents that perform, adapt, 
and learn, the operations of life sciences 
organizations could transform fundamen -
tally. Because the life sciences industry is 
strictly regulated, agents must consult hu -
mans before making important decisions 
or performing major tasks. Guardrails are 
set by the enterprise, a function or busi -
ness unit, or the manager or supervisor 
overseeing that AI. 
3
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
1. We analyzed each domain in 
biopharmaceutical and medical 
technology firms and deconstructed 
their workflows to generate a 
comprehensive map of all 270 
workflows. 
2. For each workflow, we examined 
more than 1,200 key tasks to assess 
whether they could be agentified, with 
simpler or more complex agents; the 
share of the task that agents could 
handle; and the time they could save. 3. We examined the roles responsible 
for those tasks and the amount 
of time each role spends on them. 
We analyzed 180 job families and 
identified ten new roles, such as 
agent orchestrator and AI quality 
manager, that will be needed to 
support agents.
4. This provided us with a bottom-up 
view of growth and productivity 
opportunities, which we analyzed 
at the profit and loss (P&L) level for How we determined the potential benefits of agentic AI in life sciences
each domain. A panel of technology 
and domain experts reviewed 
the benefits of each revenue and 
expense item and considered the 
costs to deploy and manage those 
agents. 
5. We compiled those numbers by 
domain and functional area to assess 
the overall benefits to the P&L and 
the reduction in time-to-market for 
new medicines.Exhibit 1, part 2
Growth impact
Expanded and better 
assets, more eligible 
patients reached, and 
revenue pulled forward 
within 3-to-5 year time 
frame, with potential for 
incremental 1% to 3% 
CAGR above baseline 
growthRoles with AI sidekicks
With agents as integrated 
teammates, employees’ 
impact for patients can be 
ampli/f_iedWeb <2025>
<MCK254200 Agentic AI>
Exhibit <1B> of <9>
Work will transform
Note: Numbers do not include physical AI or growth from AI in products.
1Percentage pointsThere are several potential bene/f_its of AI agents in medtech.
McKinsey & Company70/endash.case80%Agenti/f_iable work/f_lows
Processes in life sciences 
where key activities can be 
augmented or automated 
by agents35%Lower-complexity agents
Agents that require 
minimal coding, with 
mostly business-driven 
build and oversight and 
rewiring mechanism 
for adoption35%‘Superpowered’ work
Work/f_lows can be 
extended by agents doing 
work that is currently too 
complex or costly for 
humans
Roles will change
95% 25/endash.case35%Freed-up enterprise 
capacity
Assigning agents to tasks 
where they excel (and 
humans don’t) can free up 
time for where humans’ 
unique abilities are 
needed most10+New role types needed
Agentic workforce can 
succeed with help from 
humans in new roles such 
as agent orchestrator and  
AI governance or quality 
manager
Revenue will be aﬀected
3/endash.case7% 6/endash.case8%Cost eﬃciency
Potential savings from 
increased productivity, 
reduced vendor spend, 
and optimized operations2.2–
4.7 p.p.1Impact to EBITDA
Full potential enterprise- 
wide impact on EBITDA 
within a time horizon of 
3 to 5 years 
4
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
Agentic AI is catalyzing three 
key shifts in life sciences
 1.  Agentic AI can transform eight out of ten 
workflows . Of the more than 270 life sciences 
workflows we analyzed, 75 to 85 percent 
of workflows in pharma and medtech have 
tasks that could be automated or augmented 
by agents (Exhibit 2). Nearly 40 percent 
of workflows are relatively standard and 
predictable and could be addressed by 
lower-complexity agents that business users 
could customize and implement themselves, 
possibly with minimal technical support. 
Another 50 percent are more complex, 
domain-specific workflows that companies 
could support with custom-built agents to help 
them differentiate from competitors. 
 2.  Up to 95 percent of life science roles may 
have agentic teammates . Every functional 
area, domain, and job family has tasks for 
which agents could be deployed. Two-thirds  
of those roles will be involved in some 
combination of directly building, managing, 
and supervising lower-complexity agents, 
which they will orchestrate, tune, monitor, 
and maintain. New team roles, such as agent 
orchestrators, AI governance and agent 
quality managers, and agent supervisors, 
could also be needed to implement and 
support agentic workers.
        We expect this shift to free up 25 to 40 
percent of enterprise capacity, allowing 
employees to focus on more strategic, value-
adding, and productive work (Exhibit 3). 
At first, this additional capacity will free up 
employees for part of their work week, but 
we anticipate that over time, job descriptions, 
job families, and even organizational 
charts will evolve to replace certain roles 
entirely. This creates an opportunity for the 
leadership team—and especially human-
resource officers—to rethink the shape of 
the organization. Management will have to 
decide what to do with freed-up capacity; 
this will likely depend on the domain. Some companies will reinvest it, some will grow into 
it—for example by freezing hiring—and some 
might take the margin improvement. 
 
The greatest productivity boost may come 
from agents performing tasks that humans 
are not currently doing; we found that 40 
percent of workflows include tasks that are 
too complex or uneconomical for humans 
to perform, but that agents could handle at 
scale. Agents could find patterns that humans 
cannot, especially in complex, unstructured 
datasets. This could help researchers gather 
insights from diverse sets of scientific data 
and identify value leakage in the long tail of 
invoices, which are typically not a priority for 
human review. Agents could also collect and 
analyze data from a wide range of sources to 
continually monitor and report on a company’s 
brand health, enabling always-on brand 
performance. These agent-specific strengths 
can create possibilities for new workflows, 
processes, and ways of working.3 
  3.  AI agents could boost growth and EBITDA . 
They could lift growth by 5.0 to 13.0 percentage 
points in pharma and 3.0 to 7.0 percentage 
points in medtech, while increasing the EBITDA 
of pharmaceutical companies by 3.4 to 5.4 
percentage points and medtech companies 
by 2.2 to 4.7 percentage points over the next 
three to five years (Exhibit 4, parts 1 and 2). 
Half of this increase would come from a boost 
in net revenue from acquiring more and better 
assets, reaching more eligible patients, and 
accelerating the time to market. The other half 
would come from greater efficiency in R&D 
and manufacturing and administration. As life 
sciences companies face margin pressures 
from portfolio crowding, policy changes, and 
pricing dynamics,4 this potential margin boost 
is especially important. Capturing the full 
potential of agentic AI requires an enterprise-
wide effort to which every domain contributes. 
This may be challenging for some companies, 
but even a subset of domains transformed by 
agents would yield significant benefits.
3 “The future of work is agentic,” McKinsey, June 3, 2025.
4 “Simplification for success: Rewiring the biopharma operating model,” McKinsey, March 21, 2025.
5
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
Exhibit 2
Domain % of work/f_lows
R&D, 
regulatory, and quality
Commercial
Medical aﬀairs
Operations
IT
HR
Finance
Medtech totalDomain % of work/f_lows
Research and
early development
Development,
regulatory, and quality
Sales
Market access
Marketing
Medical aﬀairs
Operations
IT
HR
Finance
Pharma totalLower-complexity agents Higher-complexity agents Human-led or not for agents
Note: Figures may not sum to 100%, because of rounding.Web <2025>
<MCK254200 Agentic AI>
Exhibit <2> of <9>
Proportion of existing pharma work/f_lows where 
agents could be deployedProportion of existing medtech work/f_lows where 
agents could be deployedAgents can augment 75 to 85 percent of today’s work/f_lows.
McKinsey & Company
0
20
40
60
80
100
25
58
38
28
45
41
35
37
55
25
39
51
34
29
48
43
19
18
23
20
22
31
17
20
0
20
40
60
80
100
35
27
56
60
60
38
31
45
41
35
42
56
70
33
30
30
39
48
34
29
48
43
8
3
11
10
10
23
20
22
31
17
15
6
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
Reimagining work with agents
Agents can help tackle complex problems in life 
sciences, freeing people to develop more treatments 
and address other challenging problems. Here are 
six life sciences battlegrounds where agent-based AI 
can generate substantial benefits:
1. Pharma research: Accelerating discovery 
and deepening scientific insight
Research and early drug discovery involve complex 
processes, but agents can still enhance almost 
every workflow (Exhibit 5). The specialized data 
and expertise needed mean that nearly 60 percent 
of workflows will require custom-built agents. 
Once implemented, these agents can free up 21 to 
30 percent of capacity in areas such as wet labs, 
data analytics, and regulatory support, which can be redirected to expand the research pipeline or 
accelerate the progression of candidate drugs to trials. 
With agentic AI, work for early-stage drug discovery 
and scientific exploration can be reimagined in the 
following ways:
Autonomous data analysis and insight generation : 
An analytic agent can assist scientists by 
automatically preparing detailed data analyses 
of experimental data aggregated by a curator 
agent. The analytic agent would perform statistical 
analysis and visualizations, which are currently time-
intensive tasks that require the expertise of highly 
trained scientific staff. The analytic agent can then 
work with a protocol-drafting agent, which suggests 
updates to the experiment protocols based on the Exhibit 3
16/endash.case22
20/endash.case30
R&D
Customer
service
Commercial
sales
Medical
aﬀairs
Operations
HR
Finance
Tech
delivery
23/endash.case30
23/endash.case38
17/endash.case27
40/endash.case55
20/endash.case35
50/endash.case65Web <2025>
<MCK254200 Agentic AI>
Exhibit <3> of <9>
Proportion of pharma employee workloads 
that agents could free up
R&D, 
regulatory, 
and qualityDomain % of workloads Domain % of workloads
Commercial
Medical aﬀairs
Operations
General and 
administrative 
(G&A)R&D and regulatory
Commercial
Medical aﬀairs
Operations
G&AProportion of medtech employee workloads 
that agents could free upAgents could free up 25 to 40 percent of employees’ workloads.
McKinsey & Company21/endash.case30
30/endash.case36
Research and early
development
Development
Market access
Marketing
Sales
Medical
Manufacturing and
supply chain
HR
Finance
Tech delivery
Series 1
Series 2
35/endash.case45
30/endash.case35
12/endash.case25
23/endash.case38
17/endash.case27
40/endash.case55
20/endash.case35
50/endash.case65
7
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
Exhibit 4, part 1
Spend on agents (tech and full-time employees) x.x
Series 1
Series 2Web <2025>
<MCK254200 Agentic AI>
Exhibit <4> of <9>
Incremental pro/f_it and loss (P&L) impact for top pharma companies, not including baseline 
growth (indexed to 100)
P&L 
componentsCurrent state/one.numr Potential in 3 to 5 years
Net revenue
EBITDA (#, % of 
net revenue)Cost of goods sold
R&D
SG&A
1Based on aggregate level of 21 large-cap biopharma companies from FY2024 /f_inancial statements (Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisk, AbbVie, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, GSK, P/f_izer, Roche, Novartis, Merck & Co, Johnson & Johnson, Sano/f_i, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, Astellas, Takeda, Vertex Pharma, CSL, Biogen, and 
Regeneron); Johnson & Johnson, Merck & Co, Sano/f_i, and Roche based on only pharma business.
2Includes HR, legal, and tech delivery.
Source: Company /f_inancial statements; expert interviews; McKinsey Value Intelligence Platform The full potential of enterprise-wide agentic transformation could boost 
top biopharmas’ EBITDA by 3.4 to 5.4 percentage points.
McKinsey & Company
81.9
61.5
39.9
100
18.1
20.4
21.6
39.9
Series 1
Series 239.9% 
of net revenue
0.8
0.4
1.4105.0/endash.case113.0
18.1/endash.case18.6
21.3/endash.case22.8
20.2/endash.case20.4
45.5/endash.case51.243.5/endash.case45.5% 
of net revenue1.2 to 2.3
percentage points 
of EBITDA impact 
over next 5 years  
for an illustrative 
pharma company 
focusing on 
transforming 
commercial and 
corporate functions/two.numr    Potential for   
Agent-based AI can generate 
substantial benefits in six life 
sciences battlegrounds. 
8
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
Exhibit 4, part 2
Spend on agents (tech and full-time employees) x.x
Series 2
Series 1
Series 2
Series 3Web <2025>
<MCK254200 Agentic AI>
Exhibit <5> of <9>
Incremental pro/f_it and loss (P&L) impact for top medtech companies, not including baseline 
growth (indexed to 100)
P&L 
components
Net revenue
EBITDA (#, % of 
net revenue)Cost of goods sold
1Based on aggregate level of 10 large-cap medtech companies from FY2024 /f_inancial statements (Medtronic, Boston Scienti/f_ic, GE Healthcare, Edwards 
Lifesciences, Stryker Corporation, Intuitive Surgical, Abbott, Phillips, Baxter, and Johnson & Johnson); Johnson & Johnson based on only medtech business.
2Includes HR, legal, and tech delivery.
Source: Company /f_inancial statements; expert interviews; McKinsey Value Intelligence Platform The full potential of enterprise-wide agentic transformation could boost 
top medtechs’ EBITDA by 2.2 to 4.7 percentage points.
McKinsey & CompanyCurrent state/one.numr
57.5
49.3
19.7
100
42.5
8.2
29.6
19.7
Series 1
Series 2
19.7% 
of net revenuePotential in 3 to 5 years
0.8
0.8
1.8
105.0/endash.case113.0
43.0/endash.case43.9
8.9/endash.case9.0
28.3/endash.case28.7
22.6/endash.case
26.221.9/endash.case24.4% 
of net revenue0.3 to 1.6 
percentage points 
of EBITDA impact 
over next 5 years  
for an illustrative 
medtech company 
focusing on 
transforming 
commercial and 
corporate functions/two.numr    Potential for   
SG&AR&D
latest findings. The human scientist reviews and 
adjusts these suggestions, enabling faster iteration 
and improved experiment design.
Data-driven drug-candidate selection : A key 
function of the drug discovery team is to evaluate 
drug candidates for a specific target. Traditionally, 
these decisions relied heavily on early preclinical 
efficacy experiments and expert opinions. With AI 
agents, the team can benefit from a much richer 
set of inputs. AI agents can synthesize insights 
from the latest literature and trial data compiled 
by a literature-explorer agent, perform in silico 
modeling of success probabilities using real-world 
data, multiomic analyses from the data-science 
agent, and endpoint simulations from the feature-generation agent, creating a prioritized list of 
potential drug candidates. With the help of these 
agents, the team can efficiently review and approve 
this list for the next stage of screening and testing, 
significantly improving and hastening the decision 
process.
Accelerated regulatory submission preparation : 
A regulatory-drafting agent could autonomously 
compile the latest efficacy and toxicology testing 
data into a submission-ready document. What 
once took a week or two of manual effort now 
only requires the scientist a few hours to review 
and finalize. By automating the drafting process, 
the regulatory-drafting agent not only reduces 
timelines but also ensures compliance with 
9
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
Exhibit 5
Series 2
Series 1
Series 2
Series 3Web <2025>
<MCK254200 Agentic AI>
Exhibit <6> of <9>
Predominantly 
lower-complexityMix of lower- and 
higher-complexityPredominantly 
higher-complexityMainly human-led or not for agentsRelative value at stake by work/f_low, with type of agent
1Mechanisms of action.Most work/f_lows in research and early development can bene/f_it from agents.
McKinsey & CompanyDisease understanding and target identi/f_ication Compound identi/f_ication and optimization
Preclinical evidence generation Clinical trial preparation
Disease area
research:
discovery
Disease area
research:
evidence
generation
Data
consolidation
and synthesis
Target
prioritization
Feature
screening and
target
identi/f_ication
Target
validation
Lab resource
managment
Preclinical
experiment design
Study blueprint
and evidence
synthesis
In vivo eﬃcacy,
toxicology, and
pharmacology
In vitro validation
and MOA
1
characterization
Biochemical
pathway
impact analysis
Data set
management
Therapeutic
candidate
identi/f_ication
Lead
optimization
Druglike
property
identi/f_ication
Formulation
development
Protocol
authoring
Prognostic modeling
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
optimization
Subpopulation discovery and
evidence synthesis
Endpoint simulation
Head-to-head comparisons for
internal decision-making
10
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
regulatory standards, allowing the scientist to focus 
on higher-value tasks, such as strategic innovation 
and building relationships.
Several large pharmaceutical companies are actively 
leveraging AI, including agentic AI, to speed up 
various stages of drug discovery and development. 
One has a collaboration with a company that 
integrates AI and robotics for drug discovery. It uses 
AI-powered platforms for molecular modeling, crystal 
structure prediction, and screening to identify and 
improve small-molecule drugs. The AI autonomously 
performs complex calculations and predictions to 
reduce the list of potential drug candidates and 
optimize workflows.
2. Pharma development: Accelerating clinical 
trials and enhancing patient journeys
Agentic AI can help companies conduct clinical trials 
faster, more efficiently, and with higher quality while 
also improving the patient experience. Although 
study teams have already been working toward these 
goals using digital tools, AI, and gen AI, we expect a 
major shift to come about once agents are more fully implemented. Agents are no longer just tools for study 
teams; they are evolving into intelligent partners that 
collaborate with teams throughout the clinical trial 
process and can operate semiautonomously to handle 
a wide range of workflows. Over the next five years, 
we expect this to lead to a 35 to 45 percent boost in 
productivity in clinical development that will benefit 
every function (Exhibit 6).
Agents can also shorten timelines, delivering medicines 
to patients more quickly and accelerating revenues, 
and enhance decision-making and execution, thereby 
increasing the likelihood of demonstrating the efficacy 
and safety of novel treatments. 
We see agents performing seven key roles in 
development: 
1. optimizing trial designs informed by agentic 
retrieval of benchmarks and data, with scenarios 
designed using machine learning (ML)
2. orchestrating sites, vendors, and sponsors for 
site start-ups
Exhibit 6
Incremental time spent on agents Time savings from agentsWeb <2025>
<MCK254200 Agentic AI>
Exhibit <7> of <9>
Work hours shifted by agentic workforce, % of function capacity
FunctionAgents can bene/f_it roles in every clinical development function.
McKinsey & Company35/endash.case45
Clinical science
Clinical operations and trial
management
Biostats and data
management
Medical writing and med
aﬀairs
Regulatory aﬀairs and
compliance
Analytical chemistry,
manufacturing, and quality
Safety and
pharmacovigilance
Cross-functional
Total Total20/endash.case25
35/endash.case40
45/endash.case50
45/endash.case50
20/endash.case25
20/endash.case25
45/endash.case50
30/endash.case35/endash.case5
/endash.case8
/endash.case10
/endash.case10
/endash.case5
/endash.case5
/endash.case10
/endash.case7
/endash.case7
11
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
3. managing clinical data from one-click electronic 
data capture design through anomaly detection 
and query triage
4. engaging sites and principal investigators with 
hyperpersonalized, multimodal messages
5. managing trials, including root cause 
investigations and next-best-action 
recommendations
6. assembling submission materials informed by 
regulatory intelligence
7. automating document production throughout 
the trial life cycle
Here is how three of these would work in detail:
Trial design : A clinical-trial benchmarking agent 
identifies similar trials and establishes benchmarks 
for key metrics such as enrollment rate. Meanwhile, 
a literature-explorer agent evaluates the 
competitive landscape and unmet needs. Both 
agents send their outputs to a trial-optimizer agent 
that uses ML and simulation tools to refine the trial 
design, under the supervision of a human clinical 
scientist. Once the design is finalized, a document-
generation agent generates a draft of the protocol 
in minutes, using a library of design elements 
such as endpoints, and refines the draft through 
feedback from a critic agent and a human clinical 
scientist. This approach could enable companies 
to design trials 50 percent faster with 25 percent 
fewer amendments. 
Study start-up: A site feasibility agent creates site 
questionnaires based on the trial protocol and 
compiles the responses. The start-up selection 
agent then uses ML -based site selection to produce 
a prioritized site list of predicted high-performing 
sites for the study start-up team to review and 
confirm. A site contracting agent then automatically 
drafts “first time right” site contracts based on 
fair market value benchmarks, site potential, and 
site-specific precedents, speeding up contracting 
processes. The process then moves to the 
document drafting agent, which automatically drafts 
site-specific documents such as the investigator 
brochure and site initiation visit materials, enabling the start-up team to quickly activate the sites. This 
agentic approach could double site activation rates 
with 30 to 50 percent fewer staff. 
Clinical data flow : At the beginning of trials, the 
case report form (CRF) design agent extracts 
structured protocol metadata to create annotated 
CRFs, which are then provided to the electronic 
data capture configuration agent to support quicker 
database setup. During the trial, the data entry 
agent flags delays in data entry and involves clinical 
research associates to ensure CRFs are completed. 
Meanwhile, the query generation agent detects 
anomalies in the data and automatically raises 
relevant queries. These queries are handled by a 
data cleaning agent, which flags complex queries 
for human review. Once the database is locked, the 
programming agent produces analysis datasets 
and results tables from the collated data, with a 
human biostatistician providing input for nonroutine 
datasets. This process could boost productivity in 
data management and programming by 60 percent, 
while reducing database build timelines from two to 
three months to under two weeks. 
One major pharmaceutical company has adopted a 
multi-agent trial copilot to improve its oversight of 
the development process. The clinical operations 
team works with a supervisor agent that manages 
a group of specialized agents focused on site 
activation, subject enrollment, data management, 
and analyzing longitudinal trends. These agents 
use data from the company’s clinical control tower, 
including portfolio, trial, and site information, to 
provide real-time, actionable insights and initiate 
proactive interventions to support on-time trial 
completion. The company plans to give its agent 
teams more independence in the future, including 
engaging principal investigators and clinical 
research associates for routine tasks.
3. Medtech research and development: 
Accelerating innovation and prototyping
By automating complex tasks such as prototyping, 
design controls, patent filing, and risk management, 
agents could free up 15 to 20 percent of capacity 
for R&D teams, allowing them to focus on higher-
value activities, including strategic innovation, 
partnerships, and designs centered around 
patients and healthcare professionals (HCPs). This 
12
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
acceleration would shorten the time to market for 
life-saving medical devices. Also, improved decision-
making and risk mitigation could lead to safer, more 
effective devices that better meet patient needs, 
boosting clinical and commercial success.
Agents could support medtech R&D teams in a 
variety of ways:
Prototyping and design controls : Prototyping 
is essential in medtech R&D, where engineers 
improve device designs and manufacturing to 
meet requirements. Agents could transform 
this process and assist teams by autonomously 
creating and testing virtual prototypes. A design-
simulation agent could analyze specifications, 
simulate performance, identify flaws, and suggest 
improvements early. A compliance agent could 
compare prototypes to standards and flag 
noncompliance in real time.
Innovation mapping and patent filing : In the 
medtech sector, it is crucial to stay at the forefront 
of innovation. Agents can transform how R&D 
teams identify opportunities and safeguard 
intellectual property. An innovation-mapping agent 
could scan defined sources of patents, industry 
literature such as journals, and trade publications 
to discover emerging technologies and trends, then 
compare these to existing products and solutions 
to identify unmet needs and opportunities for research. This agent could generate a prioritized list 
of opportunities along with competitive analyses, 
which could be designed and prototyped with 
agentic assistance. Once a concept is developed, 
a patent-drafting agent could prepare the 
initial submission, ensuring legal and technical 
compliance. Automating these tasks would help 
R&D teams find high-value opportunities more 
quickly and better secure their IP.
Design controls and regulatory readiness : Once 
a design has been finalized, a documentation 
agent could generate design-control files based 
on specifications, reducing design time. Risk 
management is vital in medtech R&D to ensure 
device safety and efficacy. Agents could streamline 
this by automatically identifying, assessing, and 
suggesting mitigations for risks throughout the 
product life cycle. A risk-assessment agent could 
analyze design inputs, manufacturing, and post-
market data to create a risk profile. A risk mitigation 
agent could recommend design or process changes 
using predictive modeling. And for regulatory 
readiness, a submission agent could compile the 
necessary documents, reducing risk-management 
efforts by 15 percent. 
As an example, a leading medtech company is 
already leveraging agentic AI to transform its 
product and software development processes. 
The company has implemented a multi-agent 
By automating certain complex 
tasks such as prototyping, agents 
could free up 15 to 20 percent 
of capacity for R&D teams.
13
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
system to tackle key challenges such as managing 
interdependencies between systems and teams, 
tracking delivery, and consistently maintaining 
quality in more complex products and devices. 
Specialized agents now oversee critical tasks, 
including software testing, design iteration, and risk 
mitigation, while a central AI supervisor with human 
oversight coordinates these efforts to ensure 
smooth integration among teams and systems. By 
automating routine tasks and providing real-time 
insights, the company has greatly enhanced its 
ability to manage complexity and deliver high-
quality products on schedule.
4. Commercial pharma and medtech: Elevating 
customer engagement and market success
Commercial organizations in both pharma and medtech 
are grappling with rising complexity in engagement, 
increasing demands for personalization from HCPs 
and patients, an evolving policy environment, and cost 
constraints. Internal processes from brand planning to 
field enablement remain fragmented and inefficient, 
burdened by manual workflows and legacy systems. 
In pharma, companies’ growing dependence on a 
sprawling network of external vendors is making cost 
structures unsustainable. 
Agentic AI can help by taking on time-consuming 
activities like drafting brand plans or preparing 
contracts, freeing up teams to focus on strategic 
execution. They can also unlock new capabilities 
that were previously out of reach, including real-
time insights for decision-making; self-service 
content creation; automated first-pass medical, 
legal, and regulatory reviews; and personalized 
pre-call planning for field representatives. These 
initiatives could translate into a 4 to 8 percent 
increase in revenues and a 5 to 9 percent reduction 
in commercial spending over the next five years. 
Here are three transformations that can be enabled 
by agentic AI in commercial: 
Sales engagement : Agentic AI can transform sales 
operations in life sciences. Intelligent assistants 
can redefine account representative engagement 
by supporting pre- and postcall activities, such as 
HCP and territory planning, capturing insights from 
individual interactions, automating follow-up tasks, 
and providing personalized coaching feedback to reps. These tools can help identify trends early 
and enable personalized, data-driven engagement 
by synthesizing clinical evidence, product info, 
and engagement data in a conversational format. 
Virtual sales platforms can extend reach to hard-to-
access territories and HCPs in a compliant, scalable 
way, adding value to the HCP experience. These 
innovations could reduce the burdens of sales 
representatives by 15 to 25 percent and increase 
revenue by up to 3 percent through improved 
targeting and stronger relationships.
Marketing : Agentic AI is revolutionizing marketing 
workflows in strategic planning, content creation, 
review, campaign development and execution, 
and performance tracking. Self-serve platforms 
let marketers produce content independently, 
reducing their reliance on agencies and speeding 
up turnaround times. Automated pre-MLR (medical, 
legal, and regulatory) review systems identify 
common issues before formal review, decreasing 
cycle times and improving compliance. Unified 
platforms that aggregate internal and external data, 
with conversational interfaces, help marketers 
understand brand performance and patient and 
HCP needs. These tools automate tasks, speed 
execution, and provide intelligence to enhance 
responsiveness to changes in the market.
Market access and payer engagement : Agentic AI 
can enhance market access and payer engagement 
through increased automation, better decision-
making, and minimized value leakage. Advanced 
gross-to-net optimization can simulate complex 
access scenarios at brand and portfolio levels, 
helping to inform trade-offs that were once difficult 
to make. A contracting-intelligence platform can 
enable smarter contract decisions by analyzing past 
deals, modeling potential outcomes, and guiding 
negotiation strategies. Several manual tasks can 
also be automated, including creating initial contract 
drafts, monitoring performance, and tracking 
compliance. Automated invoice auditing can ensure 
contract terms are upheld and identify discrepancies 
early. Together, these innovations can reduce manual 
workload, boost financial results, and support more 
strategic, data-driven decisions while fostering more 
consistent and effective engagement with payers. 
14
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
5. Pharma and medtech operations: 
Accelerating execution and decision making 
Life sciences operations face many challenges, 
including high interdependence between 
subfunctions and the need for time-critical 
decision-making and extensive quality and 
compliance documentation. These issues can be 
addressed with tailored agents or groups of agents, 
which can speed up processes and boost efficiency 
by improving metrics like service levels, forecast 
accuracy, manufacturing throughput, deviation rate, 
and cycle time for document creation. Agent-based 
AI could help with 75 to 85 percent of workflows 
in operations, reducing the time required for key 
tasks in supply chain, procurement, manufacturing, 
product development (CMC), and quality by 25 to 35 
percent (Exhibit 7). 
Here are three ways in which agentic AI can improve 
operations:
Solving interdependencies with cross-operations 
planning : Integrated end-to-end operations 
planning—which is essential to optimizing production 
and ensuring product availability—requires alignment 
among enterprise functions. Orchestrating agents 
can enable multifunctional interactions, eliminating 
delays from inefficient communication and approval 
processes. Agents can connect components 
such as supply planning, raw material supply, and 
manufacturing by reacting to external factors such 
as demand fluctuations. This integration transcends 
Exhibit 7
Incremental time spent on agents Time savings from agentsWeb <2025>
<MCK254200 Agentic AI>
Exhibit <7> of <9>
Work hours shifted by agentic workforce, % of function capacity
FunctionAgents can shift workforce hours across operations functions.
McKinsey & Company25/endash.case35
Supply chain
Quality (on site)
Quality (above site)
Manufacturing (on site)
Manufacturing (above site)
Procurement
CMC
1
 (pharma-speci/f_ic)
Total Total50/endash.case55
20/endash.case25
30/endash.case35
20/endash.case25
30/endash.case35
40/endash.case45
35/endash.case40/endash.case5/endash.case10
/endash.case5
/endash.case6
/endash.case5
/endash.case6
/endash.case9
/endash.case8
/endash.case7
1Chemistry, manufacturing, and controls.
15
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
boundaries, providing teams with visibility into inputs, 
outputs, and decision-making. For example, a supply 
chain planning agent can ingest demand signals to 
simulate scenarios and create forecasts, which a 
production planning agent can then use to schedule 
batches. A raw materials agent can monitor inventory 
levels to trigger reorders, ensuring the availability of 
raw materials.
Automating decision-making : Agentic AI tools can 
improve decision-making and accelerate processes 
in all operations. To improve decision-making, 
multicomponent platform servers can be set up 
as middleware that allows agents to access data 
in a structured way, providing better contextual 
awareness of multistep tasks. Agents help identify 
changes in signals to process inputs and execute 
optimization decisions. 
For example, in plant operations, by directly 
connecting to manufacturing execution and 
process-information systems, agents can detect 
and respond to deviations in real time. They can 
increase yield and product quality by adjusting 
bioreactor parameters such as pH and O2 and 
modifying machine settings like pressure, 
temperature, and linear motor speed for fully 
automated medtech manufacturing lines. 
Procurement category management agents can 
track changes in raw material supply and commodity 
prices to initiate targeted negotiations. Negotiation 
agents can coach procurement managers to 
negotiate with suppliers. Supplier management 
agents can observe suppliers’ performance metrics 
and detect negative trends, such as in service levels, 
before they significantly affect operations.
Accelerating document generation : Operations 
teams spend a lot of time manually drafting good 
manufacturing practice documents for on-site and 
above-site workflows. Two types of documentation 
agents can help ease this burden. 
The first type creates templates for standardized 
documents by using historical reports and good 
documentation practices requirements to draft 
initial versions of standard operating procedures, 
deviation and corrective and preventive action 
reports, validation protocols and reports, change control impact assessments, and technology 
transfer documents, drastically reducing the labor 
hours needed. These agents can also generate 
engineering and maintenance reports, such as 
equipment failure mode and effects analyses 
and preventive maintenance plans, along with 
procurement documents such as contracts and 
requests for proposals. 
The second type of document agent connects 
to data sources, such as laboratory information 
management system testing results and 
manufacturing execution system process 
parameters, to generate near-final drafts of 
documents such as supplemental biologics license 
application filings for technology transfers. 
Pilots and early assessments show that 
documentation agents can achieve 75 to 80 
percent productivity gains for initial document 
generation. Additional benefits are possible through 
collaboration with document review agents that 
ensure compliance with regulatory and quality 
standards. End-to-end document generation 
and review agents can cut turnaround times from 
weeks to hours, enabling cross-functional teams to 
concentrate on final review and approval.
6. Information technology: Transforming 
IT operations and driving innovation
Agentic AI can revolutionize how IT organizations 
develop and manage technology.
Agent-powered application development : The 
integration of agentic AI into software development 
is transforming how digital products are designed 
and built. Instead of relying on product analysts to 
write user stories, designers to create mockups, 
and QA analysts to develop test scripts, agents 
can generate all these components with less 
oversight. Developers can assemble code using 
natural language commands rather than traditional 
programming languages. AI can handle routine 
coding tasks efficiently, analyze design patterns, 
and suggest improvements, allowing human 
designers to focus on creativity and strategic 
planning. This streamlined process accelerates 
development and improves the quality of new 
software products.
16
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
Automation of IT operations : As AI technology 
advances, traditional IT operations will experience 
significant changes. Tasks such as issue detection, 
event correlation, and service-request fulfillment 
can be fully automated. Agentic AI systems can 
update continuous integration and continuous 
delivery pipelines enterprise-wide as policies 
evolve, disseminate insights from new software 
updates to every deployed system, and perform 
automated threat monitoring. AI-driven systems 
can predict and resolve issues before they affect 
operations, ensuring smoother and more reliable IT 
services. This automation can save costs, improve 
service quality, and increase user satisfaction.
Accelerating legacy system migration with 
intelligent automation : Agentic AI can streamline 
the migration process to modern enterprise systems 
by automating complex and time-consuming 
tasks for development teams. Migration agents 
can analyze legacy systems, map data structures, 
and identify dependencies to ensure a smooth 
transition. These agents can also verify data 
integrity, detect inconsistencies, and automate data 
cleansing, reducing errors and manual effort. Using 
AI-driven insights, organizations can accelerate 
their migration timelines, minimize disruptions, 
and achieve a seamless transition to the new 
environment, enabling faster realization of business 
value. As many organizations rely on systems that 
are nearing the end of their life cycles—such as 
enterprise-resource planning—this acceleration is 
critically needed.
While the opportunity to transform IT with AI is real, 
so too is the burden it will create for IT. Business units and functions are deploying new AI faster than 
ever and are increasingly experimenting with new 
technology that is easier to build and deploy. This 
could create a complex technology landscape that, 
if left unmanaged, will become the next tranche of 
legacy systems that will be challenging to operate 
and keep up-to-date. 
A Fortune 500 company launched a $600 million 
initiative to upgrade its aging systems, which 
included 400 applications, but faced challenges 
due to slow manual coding processes and 
inconsistent coordination. AI tools were used 
to automate code conversion, but they did not 
significantly accelerate the process. Human 
workers migrated to supervisory roles, managing 
teams of more than 100 AI agents responsible for 
documentation, coding, and testing. This change 
cut time and effort by over 50 percent. Specialized 
teams of agents worked on specific features, with 
their work reviewed and coordinated by other 
agents. Human supervisors ensured the smooth 
execution of these agent-managed tasks.
The path to implementation
Unlocking the full potential of agentic AI in life sciences 
requires a strategic, organization-wide approach 
that redefines workflows, roles, and human–agent 
collaboration. Our Rewired framework offers a 
concrete foundation to approach this.5 To ensure 
successful implementation at scale, organizations 
must focus on several critical enablers:
 1.  Guide from the top : A clear, top-down mandate 
from leadership is essential. Leadership’s  Unlocking the full potential of 
agentic AI in life sciences requires a 
strategic, organization-wide approach 
that redefines workflows, roles, and 
human–agent collaboration.
5 “Rewired and running ahead: Digital and AI leaders are leaving the rest behind,” McKinsey, January 12, 2024.
17
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
focus should be on aligning agentic AI’s 
value-creation potential with corporate 
strategy rather than on technology challenges. 
Leadership must steer clear of small, 
incremental improvements by championing 
a bold vision, setting ambitious goals, and 
ensuring accountability across functions.
 2.  Reimagine workflows : Operational leaders 
should strive to reimagine work in their 
domains. This involves identifying high-value 
workflows that can incorporate agents, 
providing every user with intelligent interfaces 
to access agent capabilities, and encouraging 
a culture of innovation and experimentation. A 
thorough understanding of current processes 
and the capabilities of agentic AI is essential, 
from leaders down to the front line.
 3.  Invest in people : Many roles will change from 
doing manual and repeatable tasks to setting 
goals and steering AI agents. Traditional 
process and people management will migrate 
toward supervising hybrid teams, leading 
to changes in organizational structures. 
Employees will need new skills and tools to 
activate and supervise agents and overcome 
the cultural and organizational barriers 
to adoption. Additionally, new business 
processes will be needed to measure, monitor, 
and improve the performance of the agentic 
workforce. The talent function will play a 
significant role in managing these transitions 
and can begin exploring the implications now.
 4.  Build scalable foundations : To maximize 
the benefits of AI agents, organizations 
can invest in flexible interconnected 
networks of AI agents that enable their rapid 
development, deployment, and management.6 
These “meshes” include modular, cloud-
based architectures that can handle 
increasing complexity and volume, as well 
as lower-complexity agents that empower 
nontechnical users to create and customize 
agents. Agent-to-agent interoperability and 
the ability to coordinate multiple agents will 
be key to success. Scalability also requires a robust data infrastructure to ensure agents 
have access to high-quality, real-time 
data. Managing data well is key to success 
and includes aligning the organization on 
data ontologies and ownership. Strategic 
partnerships with technology providers and 
start-ups can provide access to cutting-edge 
innovation.
 5.  Establish robust change-management to 
ensure adoption and value at scale : The 
transformative potential of agentic AI requires 
a robust and sustainable change-management 
strategy. Efforts should include role modeling 
by executives, a compelling change story, 
training, ongoing coaching, and incentives 
to encourage and reward adoption. It should 
also involve integrating agents into existing 
business processes, such as management 
reviews, quarterly business reviews, and sales 
performance evaluations, along with mechanisms 
to gather and incorporate feedback. 
 6.  Set risk management and governance 
guardrails : As agentic AI becomes embedded 
in critical workflows, it’s best for organizations 
to establish strong governance frameworks 
to ensure ethical use. These include clear 
accountability for decisions made by 
agents, guardrails to prevent unintended 
consequences and ensure compliance with 
regulatory requirements, regular audits, and 
bias-detection mechanisms. 
 7.    Foster a culture of continuous learning : 
The implementation of agentic AI is a long-
term learning challenge for employees 
and companies. Leaders should establish 
a strategy for continuous learning and 
adaptation, including a safe environment 
for experimentation and a structured 
approach to skill-building. Organizations 
must continuously monitor technological 
advancements, assess new capabilities, and 
improve their own implementations. 
 
6 “Seizing the agentic AI advantage,” QuantumBlack, AI by McKinsey, June 13, 2025.
18
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI
Copyright © 2025 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.Dan Tinkoff  and Jeffrey Lewis  are senior partners in McKinsey’s Newark office; Delphine Zurkiya  is a senior partner in the 
Boston office, where Chaitanya Adabala Viswa  is a partner; Eoin Leydon  is a partner in the Dublin office; Lionel Jin  is an 
associate partner in the Seattle office; and Meredith Langstaff  is an associate partner in the Washington, DC, office.
The authors wish to extend special thanks to Anthony Yuen.
The authors also wish to thank Abel Fetahi, Abhi Mukherjee, Abhi Patangay, Akshay Chhabra, Alex Devereson, Alexandra 
Zemp, Anas El Turabi, Andrew Bendelsmith, Andrew Shih, Anton Mihic, Arnav Dey, Austin Lessin, Bhavik Shah, Caroline 
Tennyson, Chandra Shukla, Charles Cocoual, Chithraa Veldurairaj, Chris Llewellyn, Chris Anagnostopoulos, Dandi Zhu, Daniel 
Shea, David Champagne, Dhara Patel, Erica Tsai, Gaurav Agrawal, Gwyn Herbein, Hann Yew, Harold Brink, Hui Tan, Imran 
Mahmud, Inn Inn Chen, Jan Svoboda, Jeff Smith, Jeffrey Algazy, Jennifer Hou, Jonathan Lichtinger, Josh Sternberg, Julia 
Samorezov, Katie Kelleher, Kent Gryskiewicz, Kieran Slobodin, Killian Green, Kriti Jindal, Long Bin Pa, Lukas Corey, Madhao 
Wagh, Maria Schwarz, Martin Rosendahl, Michelle Fong, Mike Joyce, Mohammad Behnam, Nicolai von Bismarck, Nils Peters, 
Norman Carra, Oskar de Smet, Parag Patel, Pascal Schaefer, Pepe Campello Gomis, Priyank Sood, Progya Parmita, Radhika 
Jadavji, Raj Rajendran, Rasmus Hildebrandt, Robert Linden, Sami Shariff, Savannah Bergquist, Shannon Ensor, Shayn Jiang, 
Shelley Cao, Tafari Mbadiwe, Tatiana Elphimova, Timothy Ayo-Ajayi, Venky Anant, Vivek Arora, Wesley Leong, Yashaswi 
Gautam, and Yeva Shan for their contributions to this article.
Scan • Download • Personalize
Find more content like this on the 
McKinsey Insights App 8.  Mobilize an agent factory : A small, centralized 
group with leadership support can ensure 
agentic AI is deployed toward the most 
impactful use cases. The group can facilitate 
the process for reimagining workflows in 
collaboration with domain leaders, contribute 
relevant technology expertise, monitor impact 
and adoption metrics, and help remove 
roadblocks to deliver the transformational 
potential of agentic AI.
By addressing these dimensions holistically, 
life sciences organizations can harness the 
transformative power of agentic AI to propel 
innovation, achieve sustainable competitive 
advantage, and, most importantly, improve patient 
outcomes.Defining tomorrow
The true power of agentic AI lies in its ability to 
amplify human ingenuity, freeing teams from 
mundane tasks and unlocking entirely new 
possibilities for discovery and value creation. By 
embracing these systems, life science companies 
can redefine the limits of innovation, accelerate 
breakthroughs, and deliver life-changing 
therapies to patients with unprecedented speed 
and precision. We anticipate that pharmaceutical 
and medtech companies that embrace this 
transformation will operate radically differently 
and more competitively five years from now, with 
benefits accruing in the meantime. Are you ready to 
reimagine what your organization could achieve with 
an agentic workforce alongside your people?
19
Reimagining life science enterprises with agentic AI