September 2025People & Organizational Performance Practice
The agentic organization: 
Contours of the next 
paradigm for the AI era
Companies are moving toward a new paradigm of humans working together 
with virtual and physical AI agents to create value. We share lessons from 
early adopters—and what you can do next.
This article is a collaborative effort by Alexander Sukharevsky, Alexis Krivkovich, Arne Gast, Arsen Storozhev, 
Dana Maor, Deepak Mahadevan, Lari Hämäläinen, and Sandra Durth, representing views from McKinsey’s 
People & Organizational Performance Practice, McKinsey Technology, and QuantumBlack, AI by McKinsey.
AI is bringing the largest organizational paradigm shift since the industrial and digital revolutions 
(see sidebar, “The evolution of operating models”). This new paradigm unites humans and  AI 
agents —both virtual and physical—to work side by side at scale at near-zero marginal cost. We 
call it the agentic organization.
McKinsey’s experience working with early adopters indicates that AI agents can unlock 
significant value . Organizations are beginning to deploy virtual AI agents  along a spectrum of 
increasing complexity: from simple tools that augment existing activities to end-to-end workflow 
automation to entire “AI-first” agentic systems. In parallel, physical AI agents are emerging. 
Companies are making strides in developing “bodies” for AI, such as smart devices, drones, self-
driving vehicles, and early attempts at humanoid robots . These machines allow AI to interface 
with the physical world.
The evolution of operating models
In the agricultural era  prior to the 
1800s, operating models were simple 
and centered around small teams of 
craftspeople and farmers. Eighty to 
90 percent of the global population 
worked in agriculture.1
Next, in the industrial era , people moved 
into factories, and operating models 
shifted to functional hierarchies. Products 
were designed for mass replication 
by people and machines, with major 
upgrades every three to ten years. New 
roles emerged, such as factory workers, 
engineers, and shift supervisors. By 
the 1970s, 39 percent of people in the 
United States worked in the industrial 
sector, with just 4 percent in agriculture.2 
Efficient scaling drove companies’ growth 
and competitive advantage, and lean 
management became a strategic tool.
As the digital era  launched in the 1990s, 
industrial-age maxims began crumbling 
with the rise of computing. Early IT efforts 
1  Marian L. Tupy and Ronald Bailey, “The changing nature of work,” Human Progress, March 1, 2023.
2  Victor R. Fuchs, Economic growth and the rise of service employment , National Bureau of Economic Research working paper, number 486, June 1980.
3  Eiki Takeuchi, “Why Amazon releases every 11.6 seconds,” Medium, May 11, 2025.
4  State of the tech workforce 2025 , CompTIA, July 1, 2025.
5  Data 360 Database, “Employment by sector (%),” World Bank, accessed August 2025.
6  Data 360 Database, “Employment by sector (%),” World Bank, accessed August 2025.
7  “Measuring AI ability to complete long tasks,” METR, accessed September 2025.mirrored industrial thinking, hard-coding 
business processes into monolithic 
systems supporting production and 
enterprise resource planning . Companies 
soon shifted to modular digital products 
and platforms , updated monthly or even 
daily.3 Speed required agile operating 
models  with small, cross-functional teams, 
including new roles such as software 
engineers, experience designers, and 
product managers. Speed and customer 
access became the keys to companies’ 
competitive advantage. Today, 5.8 percent 
of the US population is employed in tech 
jobs,4 with only 1.6 percent in agriculture5 
and 19.3 percent in the industrial sector.6
Now, the AI era  is beginning to usher in 
the newest evolution, revolutionizing 
knowledge work like the previous eras 
revolutionized physical work, with the 
agentic organization bringing together 
humans, AI agents, and machines in the 
workplace of the future.The promise of this new paradigm will 
depend upon the continued growth of 
AI’s capabilities, as well as other factors 
such as regulation. The length of tasks 
that AI can reliably complete doubled 
approximately every seven months since 
2019 and every four months since 2024, 
reaching roughly two hours as of this 
writing.7 AI systems could potentially 
complete four days of work without 
supervision by 2027. This would be a 
phenomenally accelerated evolution—
from an intern-level employee requiring 
constant supervision to a mid-tenure 
employee who can operate independently 
to, perhaps, a senior executive who can 
shape and drive strategies.
Organizational paradigms do coexist. But 
the agentic organization may offer the 
key for the leaders to gain a competitive 
advantage by building decentralized 
outcomes-focused agentic networks.
2
The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era
The agentic organization will be built around five pillars of the enterprise: business model; 
operating model; governance; workforce, people, and culture; and technology and data 
(Exhibit 1). Imagine, for instance, the bank of tomorrow: When a customer wants to buy a house, 
a personal AI concierge activates a series of agentic workflows to serve the buyer. A real estate 
AI agent suggests properties, while a mortgage underwriting agent tailors offers based on the 
customer’s financial profile. Compliance agents ensure that the deal adheres to bank policies, 
and a contracting agent finalizes agreements before another agent fulfills the loan. All these 
workflows are overseen by an agentic team of human supervisors, mortgage experts, and 
AI-empowered frontline employees. In some cases, the bank could even extend its AI-powered 
services into furnishing, renovations, energy upgrades, and more. The bank becomes a network 
of agentic teams—an agentic organization.
Exhibit 1Web <2025>
<AgenticAI3>
Exhibit <1> of <3>
Core elements of organizational paradigms, by eraAI is leading the largest organizational paradigm shift since the Industrial and Digital Revolutions.
McKinsey & CompanyDigital
Digital channels and products, 
eg, e-commerce platforms, 
banking apps, social media, 
software as a service (SaaS)
Daily or monthly product 
releases
Digital journeys with analytics
Cross-functional teams of knowl-
edge workers aligned to prod-
ucts, projects, and segments, 
with digitally enabled front line
Iterative product delivery, 
quarterly realignment, and agile 
governance
Knowledge workers with 
T-shaped talent pro/f_iles
working in a culture of
experimentation
PC, mobile, cloud, industrial 
robots, etc
Modular systems, (micro-) 
services and APIs owned by 
(in-house) cross-functional 
teams with semiautomated 
delivery
Tera/petabytes of semistruc-
tured data for advanced analytics 
in data lakes
Google, Spotify, FacebookIndustrial
Manufactured goods via physical 
channels, eg, cars, washing
machines, mass-market soap
3/endash.case10 years between major 
upgrades
Linear, repeatable business
processes
Functional hierarchies with large 
front line for repetitive tasks,
small white-collar teams for
management and engineering
Rigid plans, waterfall delivery, and 
manual governance
Narrowly specialized functional 
talent working in a culture of
planning
Machines and harnessed energy
IT “monoliths” (eg, enterprise 
resource planning, mainframes) 
owned by (outsourced) IT depart-
ments with manual software 
delivery
Gigabytes of structured opera-
tional and /f_inancial data in data 
warehouses
Ford, GE, Toyota
 Craft and agriculture
Agricultural and artisan prod-
ucts via direct channels, eg, 
local bread, tailored clothes
Centuries to change
standard designs
Human creation and
delivery
Teams of farm workers or 
skilled individuals (artisans), 
with knowledge transfer from 
master to apprentice
Local planning and direct 
governance
Deep specialization and cul-
ture of craftsmanship
Hand tools and animals to 
help humans
Handwritten notebooks and 
ledgers
Bread, artisan clothes and 
shoes, art Era
Business 
model
Operating 
model
Governance
Workforce, 
people, and 
culture
Technology 
and data
Iconic
examples1800 2000 1800 2000 1800 2000 1800 2000
AI
AI-native channels and products, 
eg, personal concierges
Real-time personalization and
innovation
AI-/f_irst work/f_lows fueled by
proprietary multimodal data
Flat networks of hybrid agentic
teams structured to drive end-to-
end outcomes
Real-time, embedded governance 
and agentic controls with human 
accountability
Hybrid workforce with T-shaped and 
M-shaped human talent pro/f_iles 
Culture of continuous change and 
learning
Sensors, humanoid robots, drones, 
etc 
Democratized AI mesh with modular 
AI agents, agent-to-agent communi-
cation, and dynamic sourcing 
Peta/exabytes of unstructured 
multimodal tacit data
Leadership in the era still openDominant
period
3
The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era
In this article, we share early signals from our work with pioneering companies, insights from 
tech leaders and investors, and the questions executives are asking us. The agentic organization 
paradigm will undoubtedly evolve, but today’s leaders cannot wait for perfect clarity. In this 
article, we point leaders to where they can act now to shape the new era—refining their operating 
models to create more value  and rewiring  for an AI-first approach—instead of waiting to be 
shaped by it. 
Five pillars of the agentic organization
1. Business model
In the agentic era, companies will gain a competitive advantage by getting closer to customers 
via AI channels to offer real-time hyperpersonalization, streamlining processes to become 
AI-first, and building a walled garden of proprietary data as their superpower. AI-native start-ups 
and agentic companies can potentially disrupt industries, with a fundamentally different level of 
productivity (revenue per employee), cost decoupled from growth, and greater speed to market 
and innovation.
AI-native channels enable hyperpersonalization
Consumers are already bypassing shops, apps, and search engines in favor of AI-native 
interfaces such as ChatGPT. In the future, every consumer could have a low-cost AI personal 
assistant . One European utility provider  has rolled out a multimodal AI assistant to its three 
million customers. It significantly reduced average handling times, boosted customer 
satisfaction, improved response speed, and resolved more calls without a human. These 
assistants won’t just respond; they are personal concierges that will negotiate with other agents 
24/7, continuously learning from user behavior and market signals to generate ever-evolving, 
hyperpersonalized products. This also unlocks new opportunities for the ecosystem economy , 
in which companies that own customer contact can grow by meeting various customer needs 
beyond their traditional business model and industry boundaries.
AI-first workflows drive marginal costs toward the cost of compute
Banks already run mortgage and compliance processes with agent squads. Insurers  are 
reinventing claims and underwriting, while reimagining themselves as AI-native. Telcos are using 
agents in customer service and beyond . One global bank’s “agent factory” manages know-your-
customer processes  with ten agent squads, which has helped achieve a substantial positive 
impact on the quality and consistency of output. Another bank  has used humans to oversee 
squads of AI agents in modernizing its legacy core systems, enabling up to 50 percent reductions 
in time and effort. This is not automation as usual on top of existing processes—it’s a redesign 
of end-to-end processes with humans “above the loop” for strategic oversight, with potential to 
bring the marginal cost toward the cost of compute. Going forward, most, if not all, processes can 
be reimagined as AI-first, with humans and traditional IT systems selectively introduced back in 
the loop or above the loop.
Proprietary data becomes a key differentiator
If today’s AI is “an intern with the internet in its pocket,” tomorrow’s edge will come from the 
walled data gardens that the public internet doesn’t offer. Companies can outperform their 
competition by continuously capturing and refining unique, consented, proprietary data—such 
as streams of customer behavior, product usage, and sensor data—and converting them into 
differentiating personalized products and processes. AI can also help by accelerating the build-
up of data foundations and data products , as well as data-quality improvements.
4
The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era
2. Operating model
In the agentic era, how organizations are built and operate will evolve as much as the products or 
services they deliver. Work and workflows will be reimagined as AI-first, and operating models 
will evolve to flat networks of empowered, outcome-aligned agentic teams.
Work and workflows will be reimagined as AI-first
The operating model of the agentic era will be anchored around reimagined AI-first workflows, 
with humans and IT systems selectively reintroduced in AI-native design. At a European 
automaker and a public sector organization, squads of agents are reverse-engineering and 
modernizing legacy systems while humans steer and validate work. In product development, 
agents can gather feedback, analyze data, test features, and even run campaigns. Humans will 
be mostly positioned above the loop to steer and direct outcomes and selectively within the loop 
where human contact matters.
Outcome-aligned agentic teams will be organizational building blocks
Traditional organizations have been built around functional silos. Digital companies have cross-
functional product teams but are still constrained by handovers and human team size limitations, 
such as the two-pizza team1 and Dunbar’s number.2
In the agentic organization, structure will pivot to small, outcome-focused agentic teams. 
An agentic team—a smaller group of multidisciplinary humans who own and supervise the 
underlying AI workflows—can be organized to deliver clear end-to-end business outcomes 
covering the full functional value chain of marketing, product management, technology, data, and 
operations. In our experience, a human team of two to five people can already supervise an agent 
factory of 50 to 100 specialized agents running an end-to-end process such as onboarding 
a customer, launching a product, or closing the books. Agentic AI can extend the scope and 
autonomy of a product team more than ever.
Winners orchestrate flat networks of agentic teams
Proliferation of AI agents without the right context, steering, and orientation can be a recipe for 
chaos. Winning operating models of the future will empower agentic teams, with flat decision 
and communication structures that operate with high context sharing and alignment across 
agentic teams to ensure they move in sync. Organization charts (based on traditional hierarchical 
delegation) will pivot toward agentic networks or work charts (based on exchanging tasks and 
outcomes).3 Finally, agentic networks are not necessarily limited to the boundaries of a single 
organization, and different outcomes may be sourced from different parties, opening up new 
B2B opportunities.
3. Governance
In the agentic organization, governance cannot remain a periodic, paper-heavy exercise. As 
agents operate continuously, governance must become real time, data driven, and embedded—
with humans holding final accountability.
Decision-making accelerates with real-time data
Traditional budgeting, planning, and performance management cycles are too slow for AI-first 
workflows. Early movers are experimenting with “agentic budgeting,” in which AI agents propose 
budgets, scenario agents run forecasts, and reporting agents provide real-time insights. Finance 
1  Martin Fowler, “Two pizza team,” MartinFowler.com, July 25, 2023.
2  “Dunbar’s number, psychological safety and team size,” Psych Safety, October 21, 2022.
3  2025: The year the frontier firm is born , Microsoft, April 23, 2025.
5
The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era
leaders shift from collecting spreadsheets to interpreting signals, stress-testing scenarios, and 
engaging directly with the business.
Agents control agents through embedded guardrails
Just as DevSecOps (development, security, and operations) embedded automated checks into 
digital delivery, agentic organizations will embed control agents into workflows. Critic agents 
will challenge outputs, guardrail agents will enforce policy, and compliance agents will monitor 
regulation. Every action can be logged and explained in real time—from data privacy to financial 
thresholds to brand voice. An AI governance framework across the life cycle of AI agents—from 
agent discovery and initiation to decommissioning—can balance speed and scale with the 
required security and control mechanisms.
Human accountability and oversight remain
Human accountability and oversight will remain essential, but their nature will change. Rather 
than conduct line-by-line reviews, compliance officers and leaders will define policies, monitor 
outliers, and adjust the level of human involvement. The challenge is finding the sweet spot: 
enough oversight to manage risk without pulling agents back to human speed. Companies 
that get this balance right will capture more of the agentic advantage. Ultimately, the scale of 
agentic adoption will be capped by how much oversight capacity humans can provide—making 
governance itself a potential bottleneck to productivity.
4. Workforce, people, and culture
In the agentic organization, humans will move from executing activities to owning and steering 
end-to-end outcomes. That shift demands new profiles with different skills and a culture that 
provides cohesion and purpose.
The hybrid agentic workforce needs a new talent system
As agents take on execution, people will increasingly define goals, make trade-offs, and steer 
outcomes. This will change how companies plan for a hybrid workforce, whom they hire (or 
borrow), how they deploy human or AI talent, and how they measure success. HR systems 
not only track human employees but also are a repository of agents and agentic workflows. 
Performance management anchored in task completion will give way to systems that track how 
well people orchestrate agents, unlock value, and deliver outcomes. In this new paradigm, the 
talent system itself must be rethought—from career paths to incentives to leadership models.
New talent profiles with different skills emerge
In our work with pioneering organizations, we see AI agents replacing tasks historically handled 
by knowledge workers, such as analyzing documents and creating APIs. At the same time, we 
see rising demand for other skills—for example, deep problem-solving with an end-to-end lens, 
application of system design, and the ability to apply pattern recognition to edge cases where 
agents fail.
Three roles are emerging as humans work alongside agents (Exhibit 2):
 —M-shaped supervisors: broad generalists fluent in AI, orchestrating agents and the hybrid 
workforce across domains
 —T-shaped experts: deep specialists who reimagine workflows, handle exceptions, and 
safeguard quality
6
The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era
 —AI-augmented frontline workers: employees in sales, service, HR, or operations who spend 
less time on systems and more time with humans
Leaders themselves will also evolve. CEOs, product officers, and compliance heads will 
increasingly need the technology fluency once expected only of chief information officers. Filling 
these roles will require upskilling and reskilling at scale . Early evidence shows that employees 
without technical backgrounds can learn to manage agentic workflows as quickly as trained 
engineers. Career paths and performance systems will need to adapt as “boxes and lines” give 
way to ecosystems of human and digital skills. As these profiles take hold, the constructs of 
“organization” and “employee” will become more fluid, with ecosystems of human and digital 
talent blending inside and outside an organization.
Culture acts as glue and ethical compass
Culture will become both the operating glue and the ethical compass of the agentic organization. 
Pioneering agentic organizations highlight the need for orchestration—to align teams around 
shared context and outcomes, identify the right mix of human and AI capabilities (as not 
everything needs agentic  AI), and build trust between humans and agents. The culture compass 
embeds values and long-term purpose into agentic systems, so companies don’t chase short-Exhibit 2Web <2025>
<AgenticAI3>
Exhibit <for pdf?> of <3>
Skills required for evolving roles in the AI era
Gaps measured against roles today
1For example, critical thinking, problem-solving, creativity, decision-making, abstract thinking.New talent pro/f_iles for supervisors, specialists, and frontline workers will 
emerge in the agentic organization.
McKinsey & CompanyM-shaped general manager
Builds, supervises, and optimizes 
hybrid work/f_lows; has end-to-end 
product or process responsibility
How does it compare to
today’s manager role?
Needs novel skill mix, particularly 
in integrative end-to-end
thinking and ability to manage 
AI-/f_irst work/f_lowsHow does it compare to 
today’s specialist role?
Augments current expertise- 
based roles with ability to 
teach and /f_ine-tune agentic 
systems and handle exception 
cases and agentic learningHow does it compare to 
today’s frontline role? 
Enhances existing frontline 
roles—selected for their
socioemotional skills—by 
adding AI capabilitiesT-shaped deep specialist
Provides human oversight of work-
/f_lows; has extensive subject matter 
expertiseAI-empowered frontline worker
Focuses on interpersonal tasks 
where human touch is required for 
optimal outcomes
Multiskilled with ability to apply 
knowledge across domainsDeep knowledge in a speci/f_ic 
domainHigh socioemotional skills with 
basic AI /f_luencySocioemotionalSocioemotional
AIHigher cognitive¹
AI AIHigher cognitive
DomainDomain
DomainDomain Higher
cognitive
7
The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era
term efficiency at the expense of cohesion and trust. Early pioneers show that clarity, decisive 
leadership, and continuous learning are critical—but what will differentiate winners is their ability 
to preserve cohesion and identity while transforming at pace.
5. Technology and data
In the agentic organization, technology and data will get democratized, supported by an agentic 
AI mesh . Agent-to-agent protocols will make integration across systems, machines, and humans 
easier and cheaper. Successful scalers will balance build-versus-buy decisions based on 
sources of distinctiveness and competitive advantage, avoiding technology or vendor lock-in so 
they can adapt quickly to a fast-evolving offering landscape.
Distributed ownership of IT and data becomes feasible
In the digital era, technology and data systems evolved from centralized monoliths and 
databases sitting far from the business toward microservices  and data products  sitting close 
to the business. This required significant software and data engineering expertise to design, 
develop, and maintain the underlying technology and data. In the emerging agentic age, 
business-side employees will be able to independently create software assets and manage data 
through agentic AI, which automates the software development life cycle (SDLC) with oversight 
from deep specialists. Early adopters have seen productivity at least double, with employees 
from diverse backgrounds—such as a French literature graduate in one of our teams—proving as 
capable as software engineers in building agentic workflows.
To scale this transformation responsibly, organizations must adopt agentic platforms and 
architectures, such as an agentic AI mesh . These platforms provide reusable, high-performing 
“atomic” agents and data products equipped with technical safety guardrails to prevent buildup 
of technical debt or cybersecurity risks, while unlocking unprecedented levels of democratization 
and innovation.
Agent-to-agent protocols ease interactions and integrations
Agent-to-agent protocols are redefining interactions between humans, agents, IT systems, and 
devices. Rather than relying on traditional IT system integrations such as middleware and APIs  
that require heavy programming and custom system-to-system connections, agent-to-agent 
protocols enable systems to use agents to communicate with other systems. By moving to agent-
to-agent dialogue that sits above the underlying system complexity, organizations can integrate 
legacy systems, cloud platforms, and even machines such as drones into cohesive workflows 
more quickly and at lower cost. More important, this allows for faster experimentation—in which 
new capabilities can be tested, scaled, or deprecated without months of engineering effort.
Dynamic sourcing becomes critical
Many business-critical platforms were historically built in-house or selected in rigorous sourcing 
processes, with multiyear implementation transformations. These systems were intended to 
remain largely stable to secure competitiveness for decades. A much more flexible strategy will 
be needed in the agentic age. Large language models and AI products are evolving so fast that 
locking in one solution or vendor can lead to technology that is outdated in a matter of weeks. At 
the same time, organizations will need to wall in proprietary organizational context, institutional 
knowledge, and nonpublic data for competitiveness. This requires architecture that separates 
the agentic structure, logic, and data from the underlying vendor landscape.
8
The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era
How to start the journey
The most frequent question we heard in our discussions with executives was, “How do I start?” 
Executives wonder how to create a North Star vision without clarity on what the future holds; 
how to assess maturity and upgrade needs for data, technical, and governance foundations; 
how to set priorities for value and feasibility; how to bring the organization along in terms of 
skills and mindset; and how to scale faster than rivals to create a competitive advantage. The 
clear and present danger is ending up with “more pilots than Lufthansa,” being disconnected 
from value drivers, seeing AI everywhere but in your profit-and-loss statements, or ending up 
with PR fiascos.
Building on our transformation experiences, we believe that companies that want to secure a 
competitive advantage in developing an agentic organization should  think boldly , move fast , and 
go deep . In the journey to become an agentic AI leader, executives will need a different mindset 
to get to a coherent set of choices and actions across the 15 themes we have laid out in this 
article (Exhibit 3).
Exhibit 3Web <2025>
<AgenticAI3>
Exhibit <3> of <3>
Key transformations, by organizational pillarAgentic organizations will unlock changes across 15 core themes.
McKinsey & CompanyBusiness
modelOperating
modelGovernance Workforce, people, 
and cultureTechnology
and data
Channel disruption
AI channels enable 
hyperpersonalizationFrom org chart to 
work chart
Agentic-/f_irst work/f_lows 
move humans “above 
the loop”Real-time decision- 
making
Agents drive faster 
budgeting, planning, 
and performance Hybrid talent system
Functional boundaries 
blur; “hire to retire” is 
rede/f_inedDistributed
ownership
AI mesh allows 
controlled democrati-
zation of IT systems 
and data
Cost curve
compression 
AI-/f_irst work/f_lows 
drive marginal 
costs toward cost 
of computeReduced org friction
Outcome-aligned 
agentic teams become
organizational
building blocksAgentic governance
Agents control 
other agents with 
embedded guardrailsNew pro/f_iles; new 
skills
New archetypes (AI 
orchestrators, deep 
specialists, and an 
AI-empowered front 
line) emergeSimpli/f_ied integration
Agent-to-agent 
protocols ease 
integrations among 
agents, systems, 
and devices
New sources of
diﬀerentiation
Proprietary data
becomes a key
diﬀerentiable factorFlat and /f_luid
networks
Dynamic, highly
empowered teams 
steer to valueHuman oversight 
remains
The sweet spot be-
tween accountability 
and speed mattersCulture matters even 
more 
Leaders set context for 
scaling, build trust, and 
guide ethicallyDynamic sourcing 
Flexibility in decisions 
to buy or build avoids 
lock-in and protects 
intellectual property
9
The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era
We encourage leaders to think through three radical shifts to make a step change in how to 
transform for the agentic era:
 —From linear to exponential: While technology develops exponentially, organizations and 
operating models typically evolve linearly, which can limit how much value an organization can 
ultimately capture. Don’t let this happen. Leadership teams will need to take bold stances in 
adapting operating models toward the agentic organization—replacing functional silos with 
cross-functional autonomous agentic teams, redesigning incentives and support processes 
to enable the change, and investing in required capabilities.
 —From technology-forward to future-back: Delegating the agentic transformation to your 
technology leader, as you would with a software deployment, will not suffice. Leaders need 
to envision the organization of the future, its full value potential with AI-first processes 
and a hybrid human–agent organization—and then work backward to identify the places 
to begin. You can only learn by doing, not by reading books or talking about it on the golf 
course. Bringing this to life by boldly reimagining one end-to-end domain will go a long way in 
building the organization’s learning muscle. And in parallel, leaders should start planning for 
and building the scaling enablers beyond their first lighthouse.
 —From threat to opportunity: Leaders may feel apprehension about agentic AI’s impact on 
day-to-day operations. It is critical for executives to continuously engage with employees 
about the new possibilities that this technology can unlock, not just for the organization’s 
growth and purpose, but also for them as professionals. Overinvesting in upskilling beyond 
basic literacy—as well as change management, incentives, budget, communications, and 
performance management to support the transition—will help pave the way.
Concretely, leadership teams can start by taking these steps: making agentic AI a prominent part 
of the top team agenda; outlining the CEO’s vision for creating an agentic organization; ramping 
up an AI center of excellence; upskilling people; and rewiring one or two lighthouse domains4 to 
launch agentic processes quickly and “learn live.”
4  Lighthouse domains are strategic areas or business functions that have the potential to produce substantial value with the 
assistance of AI, are visible to the rest of the organization, and have sufficient technological maturity.Companies that want to secure a 
competitive advantage in developing 
an agentic organization should think 
boldly , move fast , and go deep .
10
The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era
Organizational paradigms do coexist: 89 percent of organizations still live in the industrial age, 
while 9 percent have agile or product and platform operating models from the digital age, and 
only 1 percent act as a decentralized network . But the time has come for organizations to move as 
quickly as possible toward the new agentic paradigm to gain a significant competitive advantage 
or risk being left behind.
Many factors will influence the pace of adoption, including the development of AI models, 
availability of computing power, progress in robotics, changes in regulations, societal 
understanding and acceptance, and the human appetite for risk and change. While our insights 
will evolve along with AI technology in the months and years to come, we are certain that the 
organizations that adapt and learn faster will be the early winners in this agentic era.
Copyright © 2025 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.Alexander Sukharevsky  is a senior partner in McKinsey’s London office; Alexis Krivkovich  is a senior partner in 
the Bay Area office; Arne Gast is a senior partner in the Amsterdam office, where Arsen Storozhev  is a partner; 
Dana Maor  is a senior partner in the Tel Aviv office; Deepak Mahadevan  is a partner in the Brussels office; Lari 
Hämäläinen  is a senior partner in the Seattle office; and Sandra Durth  is a partner in the Cologne office.
The authors wish to thank Ani Kelkar, Dave Kerr, Gerardo de Geest, Julie Goran, Klemens Hjartar, Mikhail Savin, 
Niels Geesing, Niels van Zijl, Olli Salo, Roman Galeev, Ulf Schrader, and Vito Di Leo for their contributions to  
this article.
This article was edited by Eric Quiñones, a senior editor in the New Jersey office.
Scan • Download • Personalize
Find more content like this on the 
McKinsey Insights App
11
The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era