November 2024McKinsey Explainers
What is the future of wellness?
Wellness is about more than feeling good. It’s a thriving business that is poised to  
keep growing.
Health is wealth , for all of us—and increasingly, for 
organizations that operate in the wellness space.  
The business of health is thriving. According to 
McKinsey’s latest Future of Wellness research, 
which surveyed more than 5,000 consumers in 
China, the United Kingdom, and the United States, 
the global consumer wellness market has reached 
$1.8 trillion per year . In the United States, the 
wellness market is growing as much as 10 percent 
per year and is now worth $480 billion. Eighty-two 
percent of US consumers now consider wellness a 
top or important priority in their everyday lives—
similar to the 87 percent and 73 percent who say so 
in China and the United Kingdom, respectively. “We 
knew that consumers were increasingly treating 
wellness as a priority,” says McKinsey partner Anna 
Pione . “What surprised us and continues to surprise 
us every year is how much of a priority it is .”
Most of us realize intuitively that health is much 
more than the presence or absence of disease. But 
what do we mean when we talk about wellness? 
McKinsey defines wellness along six dimensions: 
better health, fitness, sleep, mindfulness, 
appearance, and nutrition. In this Explainer , we’ll 
delve into what people care about when it comes to 
their health and the changes we can expect in this 
space in the future.
Learn more about the McKinsey Health Institute .
What are the top trends shaping the 
consumer health and wellness space?
In a world where people are prioritizing health more 
than they used to, consumers are increasingly 
focused—and spending—on products and services 
that are supported by data and science. Their 
emerging priorities can be grouped into five trends :
 —Health at home. The COVID-19 pandemic made 
at-home testing kits a household item. Now that 
the pandemic is less front of mind, many 
consumers are showing interest in other 
at-home kits, for everything from vitamin and 
mineral deficiencies to cholesterol levels. This is 
an emerging trend throughout the countries 
surveyed. In China, for instance, 35 percent of 
consumers reported that they had replaced some in-person healthcare appointments with 
at-home diagnostic tests.
 —Biomonitoring and wearables.  About half of all 
surveyed consumers have purchased a fitness 
wearable at some point. Watches are the most 
common fitness tracker, but other types of 
technology are becoming more popular. These 
include wearable biometric rings paired with 
mobile apps and continuous glucose monitors, 
which can be applied to the back of a user’s arm 
to track their blood sugar levels. More than 
three-quarters of respondents said they would 
be open to using a wearable device in the future.
 —Personalization’s gen AI boost. People like 
personalization: nearly one in five US consumers 
and one in three US millennials prefer 
personalized products and services. Some are 
even willing to part with their biometric data in 
exchange for personalized recommendations. 
There’s an opportunity here to pair these tools 
with generative AI (gen AI) to enable more 
precise personalization: for example, designing 
customized workouts for users based on their 
fitness data, which some wearables are already 
using gen AI to do.
 —Clinical over “clean.” Users are beginning to 
move away from wellness products that tout 
“clean” or natural ingredients and toward those 
with clinically proven ingredients. Roughly half 
of UK and US consumers reported clinical 
effectiveness as a top purchasing factor; only  
20 percent said the same for clean ingredients. 
In the United States, this trend is most 
pronounced in over-the-counter medications, 
vitamins and supplements, and beauty products.
 —The rise of the doctor recommendation. As  
the influencer economy grows—and with it, 
potentially dubious or compromised health 
opinions—consumers value recommendations 
from doctors more than ever. Consumers  
say that doctors’ recommendations matter  
most when they’re seeking care related to 
mindfulness, sleep, and overall health (including 
the use of vitamins and over-the-counter 
medications).
2
What is the future of wellness?
What are the biggest areas of growth 
in the wellness industry?
McKinsey’s Future of Wellness research, begun  
in 2020, indicates noteworthy growth in several  
key areas :
 —Women’s health.  In the past, women seeking 
healthcare have been underserved . Women’s 
health products are more available today than 
ever before—and purchases are up, too. The 
largest shares of respondents said they 
purchased menstrual-care and sexual-health 
products in the past year, yet consumers said 
they spent the most on menopause and 
pregnancy-related products. But there are still 
unmet needs in this space , particularly related  
to menopause.
 —Healthy aging.  A move toward preventative 
medicine, the growth of health technology, and 
advances in research on antiaging products are 
propelling demand for products and services 
that support healthy aging and longevity . 
Around 70 percent of consumers in the United 
Kingdom and United States and 85 percent in 
China said they purchased more in the healthy-
aging category in the past year than in prior 
years. The results were similar across age 
groups.
 —Weight management.  Nearly one in three US 
adults has a body mass index of 30 or higher, 
which is the threshold for obesity. And 
60 percent of US respondents to our survey 
said they are currently trying to lose weight. 
G
lucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) drugs, including 
O
zempic and Wegovy, are rapidly growing in 
popularity. This is especially true in the United 
S
tates, where more than 50 percent of 
A
merican c onsumers c onsider p rescription 
medication to be a “very effective” weight 
m
anagement i ntervention. —In-person fitness.  Fitness is moving from a 
hobby to a core part of people’s identities, 
es
pecially among Gen Z consumers. Fifty-six 
percent of US Gen Zers surveyed considered 
fitness a “very high priority,” compared with 
40 percent of US consumers overall. Based on 
Mc
Kinsey analysis, we expect consumers to 
ma
intain their spending on fitness club 
me
mberships and fitness apps and increase 
th
eir spending on in-person fitness classes and 
personal t raining.
 —Gut health. More than 80 percent of consumers 
in China, the United Kingdom, and the United 
States consider gut health to be important—  
and more than half of respondents said it will  
be a higher priority over the next two to three 
years. People in China and the United States are 
more likely to take probiotic supplements, 
whereas UK consumers typically choose foods 
with probiotics, including kimchi, kombucha,  
or yogurt.
 —Sexual health. We’ve seen growing demand for 
sexual-health products, likely due to expanded 
conversations around sexuality, improvements 
in sexual education, and growing support for 
female sexual-health challenges. Eighty-seven 
percent of US consumers report having spent 
the same or more on sexual-health products (such as contraceptives and adult toys) in the 
past year than the year prior.
 —Sleep.  Sleep is the second-highest health and 
wellness priority for consumers—and also where 
consumers say they have the most unmet needs. 
A large number of factors can affect a good 
night’s sleep, including diet, exercise, caffeine, 
screen time, and stress. Few, if any, tech players 
have been able to develop a holistic solution to 
consumers’ sleep issues—though sleep tech is a 
fast-growing industry . Looking ahead, there’s a 
major opportunity for companies that can use 
consumer data to address specific sleep-related 
pain points.
Learn more about the McKinsey Health Institute .
3 What is the future of wellness?
What matters most to older adults?
Of course, there’s as much diversity and variance in 
lifestyles and preferences among older adults as 
there is among younger people. But a 2023 
McKinsey Health Institute (MHI) survey of more  
than 21,000 people aged 55 and older across  
21 countries found that there were some 
commonalities . Respondents typically agreed  
with the importance of having purpose, managing 
stress, enjoying meaningful connections with 
others, and preserving their independence.  
Many of these factors intersect with a subject’s  
real and perceived health across four dimensions: 
mental, physical, social, and spiritual.
Overall, survey respondents’ perceived health in 
every dimension—and in physical health most of all—
declines as they age. Mental health is the most 
positively rated dimension for those aged 55 to 64; 
for people aged 65 and older, spiritual health is the 
most positively rated dimension.
Money also matters to older adults’ well-being. 
Across countries, older adults who are financially 
stable are more likely than their counterparts to be 
able to adhere to healthy habits, including those 
that boost cognitive health. Notably, though, 
respondents in high-income economies aren’t 
necessarily thriving more than their peers in 
economies where incomes aren’t as high. For 
example, nearly 20 percent of respondents in high-
income economies say they would like to work in 
their old age but aren’t currently doing so. Older 
adults in high-income economies also report much 
lower levels of societal participation than their 
counterparts in other economies.
Another key finding is that participation pays off. 
Survey respondents who work, volunteer, attend 
classes, or otherwise engage in their communities 
report better overall health than those who don’t. 
McKinsey’s analysis also indicates that older adults 
who engage in their communities have lower 
healthcare costs.Learn more about the McKinsey Health Institute , 
and click here to learn about health-related job 
opportunities  if you’re interested in working at 
McKinsey.
Articles referenced:
 —“What’s new in consumer wellness trends? ,”  
May 16, 2024, Anna Pione
 —“The trends defining the wellness market ,” 
February 21, 2024, Anna Pione
 —“Closing the women’s health gap: A $1 trillion 
opportunity to improve lives and economies ,” 
January 17, 2024, Kweilin Ellingrud , Lucy Pérez , 
Anouk Petersen , and Valentina Sartori
 —“The trends defining the $1.8 trillion global 
wellness market in 2024 ,” January 16, 2024, 
Shaun Callaghan , Hayley Doner, Jonathan 
Medalsy, Anna Pione , and Warren Teichner
 —“Age is just a number: How older adults view 
healthy aging ,” May 22, 2023, Hemant Ahlawat , 
Anthony Darcovich, Martin Dewhurst, Ellen 
Feehan, Viktor Hediger, and Madeline Maud
 —“Still feeling good: The US wellness market 
continues to boom ,” September 19, 2022, Shaun 
Callaghan , Martin Lösch , Jonathan Medalsy, 
Anna Pione , and Warren Teichner
 —“Unlocking opportunities in women’s healthcare ,” 
February 14, 2022, Emma Kemble, Lucy Pérez , 
Valentina Sartori , Gila Tolub, and Alice Zheng
 —“Sleep on it: Addressing the sleep-loss epidemic 
through technology ,” June 24, 2021, Djavan De 
Clercq, Nelly Papalambros, and Tobias 
Silberzahn
4
What is the future of wellness?
 —“Wellness worldwide: Consumer insights from 
four countries ,” April 8, 2021, Shaun Callaghan , 
Eric He, Sara Hudson, and Stefan Rickert —“Sweating for the fitness consumer ,” June 21, 
2021, Eric Falardeau , John Glynn, and Olga 
Ostromecka
— “Feeling good: The future of the $1.5 trillion 
wellness market ,” April 8, 2021, Shaun 
Callaghan , Martin Lösch , Anna Pione , and 
Warren Teichner
Designed by McKinsey Global Publishing
Copyright © 2024 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.Get to know and directly engage with senior McKinsey experts on the 
business of wellness
Anna Pione  is a partner in McKinsey’s New York office, where Warren Teichner  is a senior partner;  
Eric Falardeau is a partner in the Montreal office; Martin Lösch  is a senior partner in the Stuttgart office; 
and Shaun Callaghan is a partner in the New Jersey office.
Scan • Download • Personalize
Find more content like this on the 
McKinsey Insights App
5
What is the future of wellness?